Capsicum Object Capabilities
============================

Capsicum is a lightweight OS capability and sandbox framework, which allows
security-aware userspace applications to sandbox parts of their own code in a
highly granular way, reducing the attack surface in the event of subversion.

Originally developed at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory, and
initially implemented in FreeBSD 9.x, Capsicum extends the POSIX API, providing
several new OS primitives to support object-capability security on UNIX-like
operating systems.

Note that Capsicum capability file descriptors are radically different to the
POSIX.1e capabilities that are already available in Linux:
 - POSIX.1e capabilities subdivide the root user's authority into different
   areas of functionality.
 - Capsicum capabilities restrict individual file descriptors so that
   only operations permitted by that particular FD's rights are allowed.


Overview
--------

Capability-based security is a security model where objects can only be
accessed via capabilities, which are unforgeable tokens of authority that only
give rights to perform certain operations.

Capsicum is a pragmatic blend of capability-based security with standard
UNIX/POSIX system semantics.  A Capsicum capability is a file descriptor that
has an associated rights bitmask, and the kernel polices operations using that
file descriptor, failing operations with insufficient rights.


Capability Data Structure
-------------------------

Internally, a capability is a particular kind of struct file that wraps an
underlying normal file.   The private data for the wrapper indicates the
wrapped file, and holds the rights information for the capability.


FD to File Conversion
---------------------

The primary policing of Capsicum capabilities occurs when a user-provided file
descriptor is converted to a struct file object, normally using one of the
fgetr() family of functions.

All such operations in the kernel are annotated with information about the
operations that are going to be performed on the retrieved struct file.  For
example, a file that is retrieved for a read operation has its fgetr() call
annotated with CAP_READ, indicating that any capability FD that reaches this
point needs to include the CAP_READ right to progress further.  If the
appropriate right is not available, -ENOTCAPABLE is returned.

This change is the most significant change to the kernel, as it affects all
FD-to-file conversions.  However, for a non-Capsicum build of the kernel the
impact is minimal as the additional rights parameters to fgetr*() are macroed
out.


Path Traversal
--------------

Capsicum does allow new files to be accessed beneath a directory for which the
application has a suitable capability FD (one including the CAP_LOOKUP right),
using the openat(2) system call.  To prevent escape from the directory, path
traversals are policed for "/" and ".." components by implicitly setting the
O_BENEATH flag for file-open operations.


New System Calls
----------------

Capsicum implements the following new system calls:
 - cap_rights_limit: restrict the rights associated with file descriptor, thus
   turning it into a capability FD; internally this is implemented by wrapping
   the original struct file with a capability file (security/capsicum.c)
 - cap_rights_get: return the rights associated with a capability FD
   (security/capsicum.c)
